# Nushell feedback (2025-10)

Some opinions, which do not fit into a bug.

Before i get started:
* I really like nu.
* You guys are doing a great hobby (i guess job is the wrong word?)
* Just because I (1 person) thinks something is "bad" does not mean that it is objectively bad and has to be changed.
  * Feel free to ignore this, discuss this, or whatever.
* Everything is on AFAIK and time-of-writing basis
* Etc

## My angle

* I use nu as a shell when i need something complex
  * I use bash as main shell since [ble](https://github.com/akinomyoga/ble.sh) is better than reedline
* I use nu for scripting and probably take it to far
* I sometimes try to embed nu
* I see a lot of newbie questions on the forums

## Commands

let me quote someone experienced with nu:

> i don't trust `split words`, i haven't internalized its semantics so i just don't use it

I feel the same about a lot of commands.  

A few examples:

### `find` is a footgun

It needs a big disclaimer that it modifies the actual data.  
And even that would not help a lot of new users, since they refuse to read anything.

In my eyes it needs a different name or maybe be a flag on another command.

But maybe i have just not used it enough to appreciate it (i just `| less` and `/` - faster, etc)

### `grid` is hyper-specific

I never remember this command since it has one singular usecase: `ls | grid`.  
Either make it more general or make it a `ls` flag.

* `do {|| cd ..; ls } | grid --color` does not work
* `ps | grid --color` does not highlight high ram usage
* `grid --color {|| if $in == 0 { 'green' } else { 'red' } }` does not exist
* to get a specific column amount you need a `loop` and `try`
* etc

### what does `split words` do?

Short quiz: guess the result then try it:
* `"foo bar" | split words`
* `"nu(-shell)" | split words`
* `"1.23" | split words`
* `"bob@gmail.com" | split words`
* `"'foo'.trim()" | split words`

So what is this command for?  
Making new users give up on understanding the weird names and think this is `| split row -r '[\n \t]+'`?  
Fullfill some checklist?  
Count occurances of a word?  
Replace the [strings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strings_%28Unix%29) command (while being incompatible)?




